DI G I TAL T RANSFORMATIO N STRATE GY IN ACTIO N:
DE V E LO PI NG A ROADM AP TOW ARDS THE FO URTH
I N DUST RI AL REVOLUTIO N IN AF RICA
Report on the Side Event “Making the Fourth Industrial Revolution work for Africa”

D I G I TAL T RAN S FO RM AT ION ST RAT EG Y IN ACT ION:
D E V E LO P I N G A R OAD M A P TOWA RD S T HE FOU RT H
I N DUST R I AL R EVOLU T ION IN A FRIC A
Report on the Side Event “Making the Fourth
Industrial Revolution work for Africa”

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This document is published by the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO), under the overall guidance of Mr. Alejandro Rivera
Rojas, Executive Officer of the Directorate of Digitalization, Technology and
Agri-Business. The final document benefited from the valuable inputs, review
and constructive comments received by Ms. Rebeca Gallardo Gomez, Mr.
Darren Gleeson, and Ms. Dudzai Marufu from UNIDO, and Mr. Mactar Seck
from UNECA.
The authors are grateful to the United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa and the African Union Commission for their valuable support to the
side event “Making the Fourth Industrial Revolution work for Africa”. Special
thanks to the moderator of the session, Dr. Bernardo Calzadilla Sarmiento,
and to the distinguished panelists, H.E. Mr. Pedro Lopes, Mr. Oliver
Chinganya, Ms. Rebecca Enonchong, Mr. Ravi Gupta, Professor Mbang Sama
and Ms. Nekesa Were, who provided many interesting and useful insights into
the role of the Fourth Industrial Revolution in Africa.

DISCLAIMER
Copyright © 2020 United Nations Industrial Development
Organization
This document has been produced without formal United Nations editing.
The designations and the presentation of the material in this document do
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the
Secretariat of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO). Mention of company names or commercial products does not
constitute an endorsement by UNIDO. Although great care has been taken to
maintain the accuracy of the information presented, neither UNIDO nor its
member states assume any responsibility for consequences which may arise
from the use of the material. This document may be freely quoted or
reprinted, but acknowledgement is requested.

Image and Illustration Copyrights ©
Design: Linart Design Lab (Carolina Gutiérrez Zepeda)
UNIDO: Photos and Logos

04

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

S USTAI N AB L E DE V E LO P M ENT AT T HE HEA RT
OF A FR I C A' S DI G I TAL T RA NSFOR M AT ION

5G CONNECTIVITY

ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE

THE FOURTH
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

ADDITIVE
MANUFACTURING

ADVANCED ROBOTICS

Recent years have seen a
growing convergence between the
manufacturing and digital sectors,
heralding a major shift in industrial
production on a global basis, led by
advanced digital production
technologies.

INDUSTRIAL
INTERNET OF THINGS

BIG DATA

These avant-garde technologies boast considerably more powerful data processing
abilities than ever before, and with it, hold significant potential to increase efficiency
and value added in industrial sectors, safeguard the environment and to contribute to
human wellbeing.
In terms of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, advanced innovations present
us with considerably enlarged scope for progress in Africa.

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

05

MA KIN G T H E FO U RT H I N DUST RIA L REVOLU T ION
COU N T FO R S USTAI N AB L E DEV ELOP M ENT IN A FRIC A

Digital platforms, mobile
technologies and blockchain
technologies can be a drive
to market revolution in
Africa, enabling sustainable
consumption and production
patterns (SDG 12)

Promoting energy efficiency
and enabling a circular
economy approach to
advance sustainable
industrial development
(SDG13)

Improving productivity of
small-scale food producers
through precision farming
led by drones and big data
(SDG 2)

Optimizing public transport
systems and building safe,
resilient and sustainable
communities using big data
and AI (SDG 11)
Boosting innovation,
productivity and
competitiveness among micro-,
small- and medium-sized
enterprises (MSMEs) through
the adoption of IIoT and other
digital technologies (SDG 9)

06

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

Creating inclusive, sustainable,
and productive employment
and decent work for all and
particularly for the youth,
through the digital
transformation of industry
(SDG 8)

Enhancing gender equality
and empowerment of
women and girls through
involvement in digital
capacity building activities
and STEM operations
(SDG 5)

Promoting small-scale
IoT-powered water treatment
with remote monitoring for
rural communities in Africa
where access to clean water
is not guaranteed (SDG 6)

However, there are also some potential
downsides to this transformation which
must be addressed.
The digital divide between High Income and
Developing Countries may well widen rather
than close without robust digital policies
and international cooperation mechanisms.
The UNIDO Industrial Development Report
2020, which examined the implications of
the Fourth Industrial Revolution for all
countries, found a deeply lopsided digital
manufacturing environment.

Economies (mostly located in the Global
North) account for over 90% of global
patents and 70% of exports associated with
advanced digital production technologies.

Economies (including those in most
African countries) currently have little or
no involvement in advanced innovation,
be it as consumers or producers.

Proportion of total manufacturing value added from medium and high-tech industry (MHT)
SDG Indicator 9.B.1: Higher values indicate a country’s industry sector is focused on high-tech manufacturing.

NO
DATA

Source: UN Statistics Division

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

07

Moreover, there are considerable barriers to developing countries resolving to “leapfrog”
into the ranks of these digital frontrunners, most notably in terms of:
- Basic capabilities and digital skills for absorption of advanced technologies; 70 per cent
of firms in developing countries are still using analog technologies, according to the
UNIDO IDR 2020.
- Insufficient digital infrastructure; Examining Internet usage on an individual basis,
Africa has just 28.2 people per 100 inhabitants, compared with 82.5 in Europe, according to
the ITU.

Share of the population using the Internet, 2019

Source: World Bank

Individuals using the Internet per 100 inhabitants, 2019
(International Telecommunication Union)

08

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

- Heterogeneous progress and regional integrations and coordination issues, resulting
in internal “technology islands” within African countries.
- Access and affordability issues. Africans also continue to face the highest Internet use
costs in the world, with the average across the African continent is 7.12 per cent of the
average monthly income per gigabyte, and in some cases costing more than a fifth of the
average earning, according to the 2019 Affordability Report.
- Diversion of investment to address the crisis created by the COVID-19 pandemic,
jeopardizing the capacity of many African countries to keep pace with digital
transformation. Sub-Saharan Africa exhibits the lowest capacity of all regions to enable
working from home during the Covid-19 pandemic, according to the International
Monetary Fund.

The Ability to Switch to Telework to continue Business during the
Pandemic varied by Regions (International Monetary Fund)

World

SSA

Asia and
Pacific

Europe

MECA

Western
Hem

Digital transformation can be a driving force for innovative, gender-responsive, inclusive, and
sustainable growth. Innovations and digitalization are stimulating job creation and contributing to
addressing poverty, reducing inequality, facilitating the delivery of goods and services, and contributing
to sustainable development and the achievement of many of the key transformational outcomes of
Agenda 2063.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) has the potential to transform Africa’s economy, increase its
productivity and enhance its global and regional trade, particularly in the context of the African
Continental Free Trade Agreement (AfCFTA), which entered into force in May 2019. Some of the
continent’s greatest strengths and opportunities include the following:

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

09

- By 2030, Africa will be home to more than a quarter of the world’s population under 25.
- Africa will be a major consumption market over the next three decades.
- Many African countries have already developed policy initiatives which are either exploring the
feasibility or preparing the ground for the adoption of 4IR technologies.
- Onboarding the 200 million currently without internet access could result in significant gains in GDP,
economic productivity and gender equality.
- The continent’s emerging digital ecosystem can act as a multiplier of growth.

Ecosystem Accelerators in Africa - Tech Hubs Landscape 2019
Startup and innovation culture is deepening on the continent.

No Data

Tunisia | 29

1-4 Hubs

Morocco | 31
Egypt | 56

5-9 Hubs

Mali | 14
Senegal | 15
Nigeria | 85
Côte d’Ivoire | 22
Ghana | 25

Cameroon | 18

Togo | 13

Uganda | 19

Kenya | 48
10-19 Hubs

Tanzania | 17

+50%
Zimbabwe | 12

20-49 Hubs

South Africa | 18

TECH HUBS
ACROSS AFRICA

10

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

50+ Hubs

- The continent is increasingly mobile phone-enabled and sustainability of growth of
Internet.

Mobile Cellular Subscriptions
Mobile phone subscriptions, measured as the number per 100 people.
SDG Indicator 9.C.1: proportion of population covered by a mobile network.

50
0-25

75

100

125
150

200

Source: International
Telecommunication Union

In 2019, 50 million sub-Saharan
Africans created a mobile-money
account via a mobile phone.

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

11

The African Union has been developing its policy research frameworks at the regional level, most notably its
“Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa (2020-2030)” which aims to “harness digital technologies and
innovation to transform African societies and economies to promote Africa's integration, generate inclusive
economic growth, stimulate job creation, break the digital divide, and eradicate poverty for the continent’s
socio-economic development and ensure Africa’s ownership of modern tools of digital management.”

A D I G I T A L LY T R A N S F O R M E D C O N T I N E N T
FOR PROSPERITY AND INCLUSIVITY

CYBER SECURITY,
PRIVACY AND
PERSONAL DATA
PROTECTION

DIGITAL
ID

DIGITAL
CONTENT AND
APPLICATIONS

EMERGING
TECHNOLOGIES

RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

DIGITAL
INDUSTRY

DIGITAL
GOVERNANCE
DIGITAL
TRADE AND
FINANCIAL
SERVICES

DIGITAL
HEALTH

DIGITAL
EDUCATION

DIGITAL
AGRICULTURE

CRITICAL SECTORS TO DRIVE DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION

ENABLING
ENVIRONMENT
POLICIY AND
RGULATION

DIGITAL
INFRASTRUCTURE

DIGITAL SKILLS
AND HUMAN
CAPACITY

FOUNDATION PILLARS

12

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

DIGITAL
INNOVATION AND
ENTREPRENEURSHIP

UNIDO is the United Nations specialized agency with a mandate to promote inclusive and
sustainable industrial development worldwide. Given the unprecedented pace of the Fourth
Industrial Revolution and its associated challenges for developing countries in particular, the
Organization has been strategically deploying its policy expertise, technical cooperation and
programmatic resources, convening networks and partnerships to assist its Member States in
their transitions to the future of manufacturing, most notably through the establishment of the
Directorate of Digitalization, Technology and Agri-Business and its strategic framework “Making
the Fourth Industrial Revolution Work for All”.

The strategic approach “Making the Fourth Industrial Revolution Work for
All” focuses on innovation, digital skills, digital infrastructure and
cooperation as the key elements to enable all to reap the opportunities
and address the challenges of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The
strategic document centers upon three key outcomes: harnessing the 4IR
for economic development; improving livelihoods through the application
of new technologies; and advancing bio-based industries to ensure
sustainability. It is through these levers that UNIDO can support the
African continent to achieve an inclusive and sustainable digital future.

D I GI TA L
I N FRA ST R U CT U R E

IN N OVAT I O N

D I G I TAL
S K I L LS

CO O P E RATI O N

In view of the unique potential gains and challenges of digitalization in Africa, UNIDO, the United
Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) and the African Union convened a virtual panel
discussion entitled “Making the Fourth Industrial Revolution Work for Africa” in the context of
Africa Industrialisation Week 2020. The panel featured a variety of stakeholders from African
governments, African private sector representatives and academics, and it succeeded in
formulating several concrete recommendations, which can be taken forward to inform the African
Union Summit on Industrialization and Economic Diversification 2021.

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

13

P LE N A RY S E SS I O N
The participants of the discussion panel “Making
the Fourth Industrial Revolution Work for Africa”
highlighted several barriers to harnessing digital
industry on the African continent and also several
concrete recommendations for stimulating a
breakthrough for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
regionally. These outputs correspond to four areasinnovation, digital infrastructure, digital skills and
cooperation- and include inter alia:

Innovation

“Regionally, we must act to ensure that Africa is
not left behind. Leading African digital innovations
and companies show that the continent has
talented digital entrepreneurs, but we must put in
place the enabling environment for them to
succeed on a wider scale. Central to these efforts
are the creation of digital policy frameworks,
regional cooperation and multi-stakeholder
partnerships, dedicated funding streams and the
enhancement of digital infrastructure.”

- Digitalization has immense potential for helping
us to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, with artificial intelligence alone
DR. BERNARDO CALZADILLA SARMIENTO
capable of addressing 134 out of 169 associated
Managing Director of Digitalization,
Technology and Agribusiness, UNIDO.
targets.
- African governments need to invest in their own
digital entrepreneurs and Small and Medium
Enterprises, taking calculated risks on its own
economic base rather than foreign multinationals.
- Intelligent vehicles carry enormous potential for enhancing mobility in Africa, thus opening up unforeseen
economic opportunities.

Digital Infrastructure

- A “democratization of innovation” should be promoted to regions outside of centralized tech hubs.
- Digital technologies such as blockchain can increase the efficiency and transparency of government services,
leading to impressive gains. For instance, Rwanda increased its annual revenue by 6 per cent through
digitalization, while South Africa reduced tax collection costs by 22 per cent.
- African governments should strive towards a Single Digital Market, thus encouraging investment and
upscaling of digital capacities.
- Industrialization is key to Africa’s development; the continent cannot develop if it does not add value to its
raw materials.

Digital Skills

- Africa has several assets in launching its transition to the Fourth Industrial Revolution, most notably its young
population relative to other regions; its flexibility and resilience; and its capacity for finding creative solutions
to problems.
- With respect to readiness for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, Africa needs to train and upskill its young
people, especially with regard to STEM and “soft skills”, such as critical thinking, collaboration, creative
thinking, adaptation skills.

Cooperation

- The mainstreaming of digitalization can promote a change of mindset towards multistakeholder
collaboration for digitalization.
- The international community should help to invest in digitalization regionally and explore innovative
financing agreements; African governments cannot shoulder the burden of digital acceleration alone.
- Policymakers need to establish better consultative processes with digital entrepreneurs, as in many contexts,
policies are being developed without the input of the digital sector. Young people need to be respected as
business leaders and the drivers of the Fourth Industrial Revolution in Africa.

14

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

P L E N ARY SESSION HIG HL IG HTS

DIGITAL SKILLS

LOCAL INNOVATION

“The will of the youth to change how things are is going to be
essential for the Fourth Industrial Revolution. It is important to
think how to educate our young people, we need to close the
educational gap, we need to bet more on STEM [...] and to
prepare our young people to use innovation to build a better
continent”.

“With the pandemic that we are currently going through, the one
thing that has become clear is that local innovators can build
incredible solutions for their economies, so all we are asking is that
different governments begin to think about the money that they
have to spend on technology, and basically give the hubs and
innovators the opportunity to implement”.

H.E. MR. PEDRO LOPES, CABO VERDE

MS. NEKESA WERE

DIGITAL COOPERATION

INVESTMENT IN DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE

“The Fourth Industrial Revolution should be able to determine
who is supposed to be a part of it and come to the table. If we
want Africa to change, we have to mainstream digitalization in
all processes; there’s no exception at all. The people at the
forefront are the governments, but they cannot run the
business on their own. They need the private sector, academia,
fintech, they need everyone to be apart of it. It’s not one
person’s business, it’s the business of everyone everywhere”.

“Since a lot of Lower Income Countries cannot share the burden
of creating super-fast, reliable, affordable connectivity, especially
for the bottom three billion who reside in Africa, African
governments themselves cannot shoulder this responsibility, so
the urgency of this investment cannot be stressed enough. Plus,
the international community would have to help invest and
explore innovative financing agreements with experimentation in
emerging technologies”.

Secretary of State for Innovation and TVET,
Government of Cabo Verde

MR. OLIVER CHINGANYA

Director, Afrilabs

MR. RAVI GUPTA

Director, African Centre for Statistics

CEO, Tambourine Innovation Ventures

DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION

INCLUSIVITY

“We have a lot of strategies, policies. Let’s make a concrete
action plan on how to get there by involving experts who
know exactly what digitalization means, not only ICTs but
digitalization according with manufacturing technologies.
Industry is key to developing our countries”.

“The digital sector is an industry; it is a business… I think one
really important thing is that these are respected as business
leaders, and not as fun, young people doing fun stuff. They are the
ones who are going to drive our economies forward, and we
cannot do that if we don’t respect them as full industry leaders”.

PROFESSOR MBANG SAMA

MS. REBECCA ENONCHONG

Head of Digitalization, Mercedes-Benz Operations(Daimler)
and Founder, Digital Transformation Al-liance

CEO and Founder, AppsTech

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

15

Several statistics illustrating the growth of the digital sector and its social benefits were shared during the
session:

The potential value of the
African digital sector is primarily
driven by the mobile revolution;
around 80% of the population of
Africa now has a mobile phone.

The economic contribution of
mobile phones accounts for
7.6% of the continent’s GDP,
at roughly 240 billion US
dollars by the end of 2020.

Countries such as
Rwanda, Mauritania and
Senegal have generated
strong growth through
e-commerce platforms.

Around 260
e-commerce start-ups
were operating in
Africa in 2017.

16

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

Half of the world’s mobile phone
operators are now present in
Sub-Saharan Africa.

The regional mobile money
market is projected to be
worth 14 billion US dollars
by the end of 2020.

The International Trade
Center (ITC) identified
630 business-to-consumer
e-commerce market places
operating in 2018, accounting
for around 1.1 billion US
dollars in trade.

Mobile Economy in Sub-Saharan Africa
UNIQUE MOBILE SUBSCRIBERS

2019

2025

477m

614m

45

%

2019 - 2025
CAGR: 4.3%

MOBILE INTERNET USERS

50%

2025

272m

475m

26

SIM CONNECTIONS

2019

Excluding Licensed Cellular IoT

816m

77

%

2019 - 2025
CAGR: 4.3%

% OF POPULATION

2019

%

2019 - 2025
CAGR: 9.7%

PENETRATION RATE

PENETRATION RATE
% OF POPULATION

39%

2025

1.05bn
PENETRATION RATE
% OF POPULATION

86%

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

17

OPERATOR REVENUES AND INVESTMENT

2019

2025

OPERATOR REVENUES

OPERATOR REVENUES

44.3bn

48.7bn

OPERATOR CAPEX OF $52 BILLION FOR THE PERIOD 2019 - 2025

SMARTPHONES

% OF TOTAL CONNECTIONS
Excluding Licensed Cellular IoT

4G

18

2019

2025

44%

65%

5G

2019

2025

9%

27%

2025

30m
CONNECTIONS

% OF TOTAL CONNECTIONS

% OF TOTAL CONNECTIONS

Excluding Licensed Cellular IoT

Excluding Licensed Cellular IoT

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

3%

MOBILE INDUSTRY CONTRIBUTION TO GDP

2019

155bn
2025

184bn

9

%

OF GDP

PUBLIC FUNDING

2019

17bn

MOBILE ECOSYSTEM
CONTRIBUTION TO
PUBLIC FUNDING
(Before regulatory
and spectrum fees)

EMPLOYMENT

2019

650,000

JOBS FORMALLY
SUPPORTED BY THE
MOBILE ECOSYSTEM

+ 1.4m informal jobs

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

19

The Way Forward

Coordination and cooperation among continental institutions and strong partnerships at regional
and global levels are essential to pursuing the digitalization agenda of the continent. The side event
titled “Digital Transformation Strategy in Action: Developing a Roadmap towards the Fourth
Industrial Revolution in Africa” enabled the identification of synergies and opportunities for
enhanced collaboration between the public and business sector and the innovation ecosystem
stakeholders, to achieve an inclusive, gender-responsive, sustainable digital transformation in Africa
in the AfCFTA context.
The event was a first step toward the development of a continental mapping of innovation and
digitalization initiatives, policies, strategies and stakeholders, to improve coordination, identify
potential synergies and support the scaling-up of pioneering initiatives. The consensus points from
this side event will also be brought forward to inform the discussion on the implementation of the
African Union Strategy for Digital Transformation (2020-2030), during the AU Assembly in February
2021, as well as the AU Summit on Industrialization and Economic Diversification 2021.
These will also feed into existing industrialization and digitalization endeavours on the UNIDO side,
such as the Third Industrial Development Decade for Africa [IDDA III] (2016-2025) and the UNIDO
Programme for Country Partnership [PCP] (several of which are being implemented in African
countries).
There is scope to accelerate digital cooperation and partnership initiatives for digital
manufacturing between global and regional actors inter alia UNIDO, UNECA and the African Union.
Leveraging such partnerships could significantly multiply the effectiveness of our respective
interventions for advancing the digital transformation of Africa and its inclusive and sustainable
industrial development.
We look forward to harnessing our shared expertise, resources, convening power and networks in
pursuit of these shared goals.

20

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

A N N E X : PART I C I PAT I N G E N T IT IES

ENTITY

Government of Cabo Verde
As State Secretary for Innovation and
TVET, Cabo Verde, Mr. Lopes oversees a
wide range of investment, digitalization,
training and upskilling initiatives.
Cape Verde's Digital Strategy (EDCV),
seeks to advance "a connected Cape
Verde, with itself and with the world,
developed, inclusive, democratic, open to
the world, modern, safe, where full
employment and full freedom prevail ".

INITIATIVES

- Cabo Verde Digital is a government strategy to foster IT and
technology solutions across all nine islands of the country,
establishing the basis of a start-up ecosystem.
- The Cabo Verde Digital Voucher is a government initiative to
support 100 young people and 50 startups with pocket money,
mentorship and incubation services alongside universities and
IT companies as a way to help young entrepreneurs set up new
tech companies and startups in Cabo Verde.
- The Code for All programme is a free intensive training
course in coding languages. It is set up for unemployed people
with less than 35 years of age, fairly fluent in English, and
besides the training, the program will also support the trainees
with employment. Kode Verde is a partnership between Cabo
Verde Digital and Academia de Código.
- The government is investing in technology parks which foster
capacity building in digital qualified human capital through
training and developing an education curriculum for the young
people in the nation.
- The nation is training the unemployed into digital coders so
that the use of 4IR technologies becomes the norm.

AfriLabs
AfriLabs is a network organization of
225 innovation centres across 47
African countries. It supports hubs to
raise successful entrepreneurs that will
create jobs and develop innovative
solutions to African problems.
AfriLabs aims to encourage technology,
innovation and entrepreneurship in all
forms; promote the creation of
African-made technology; and provide
an environment characterized by open
collaboration, technical innovation
and support for the technological
community at large.

- AfriLabs has established a capacity building program for
digitalization called Digital Africa Seed Fund with the
objective of strengthening African hubs through instituting an
innovation ecosystem, while at the same time boosting
investment in digital start-ups in the economy.
- The Catalyst Program is a cross-stakeholder initiative of
AfriLabs in conjunction with ABAN, the largest network of
Angel Investors in Africa, that aims to strengthen
entrepreneurs and start-ups, hubs and angel investors, while
delivering impact results to institutional funders.
- The EdTech Hub is a collaboration between the Overseas
Development Institute, Faculty of Education at the University
of Cambridge, Results for Development, Open Development
and Education, Brink, Jigsaw Consult, BRAC, AfriLabs, and
eLearning Africa.
- Project Rollo is a capacity building program dedicated to
inspiring and supporting Small African enterprises in African
countries facing challenges to survive after Covid-19 outbreak.
It is composed of an intensive online bootcamp where business
owners and their teams will be asked to develop and execute
strategies in a competitive risk-free environment with different
market outlooks.

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

21

ENTITY

Tambourine Innovation Ventures
Tambourine Innovation Ventures (TIV) is a
technology and venture development firm
dedicated to poverty alleviation and
sustainable growth through innovation. The
company’s core focus is on bringing
technological innovations to market, with
an emphasis on the Base of the Pyramid.
They create, nurture and scale sustainable
entrepreneurial ventures in emerging
markets that have positive economic,
environmental and social benefits.

INITIATIVES

- TIV has produced several knowledge products related to the
Fourth Industrial Revolution and contributed to publications
like the UNIDO document Industry 4.0 Opportunities Behind
the Challenge.
- In partnership with the AfDB, TIV developed a Study on
Unlocking the Potential of the Fourth Industrial Revolution
in Africa, researching on the adoption of 4IR technologies in
Africa at the same time bringing awareness of the emerging
technologies on the continent.
- TIV utilized their technology commercialization and transfer
expertise in a comprehensive road mapping and readiness
as-sessment for digitalization in the sectors of greatest
importance to the economy of Africa.
- Insights from their broad and deep reservoir of expertise
helps strengthen the capacity of ventures and clients to
address challenges raised by technological advances,
environmental concerns, increasing pressure on resources, and
globalization.

Digital Transformation Alliance
The Digital Transformation Alliance
(DTA) is a global, non-profit organization
of leaders, entrepreneurs, institutions,
communities from global digital and
technology-based
business
and
economy, united by our vision of a
vibrant inclusive and sustainable
innovation economy that benefits
everyone.
Its purpose is an inclusive, sustainable
digital economy where everyone can
access and master digital skills to create
and shape one’s own future and thus
achieve one’s own vision and a better
quality of life.

- DTA connects, shares, disseminates, showcases, empowers,
ena-bles and co-creates content, solutions, and new
opportunities. They advance excellence in education, research
and entrepreneurship to support the growth of high-impact
industries, the creation of high wage jobs and inclusive
economic prosperity.
- DTA is nurturing a strong multilateral ecosystem for a
sustaina-ble digital and innovation economy through capacity
building initiatives and the creation of Digit-Tech Factory Lab.
- DITREX-Africa is a multi-sectorial technological innovation
and experience platform organized by DTA and aimed to
harnessing sustainable and inclusive development in African
countries.
- DTA also organizes Connected Classrooms, a smart
framework for connected and interactive classrooms and
universities to support an online learning market.
- DTA has programmes to support policymakers, write reports
and trends, conduct research, elaborate and establish
standards to facilitate the development and transformation
towards digitally sound infrastructures and platforms.

22

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

ENTITY

AppsTech
AppsTech is a leading global provider of
enterprise application solutions, offering a
full spectrum of products and services to
serve all enterprise software requirements,
from architecting a solution, license sales,
implementation, integration, training and
application management services.

INITIATIVES

- AppsTech’s integrated solutions, powered by Oracle, help
clients to streamline their operations, gaining greater visibility
into their supply chains, optimize their assets, and better
manage their human resources.
- With offices on three continents, AppsTech has done work in
over 25 countries and provided support to users in over 50
countries.
- Its founder, Ms. Rebecca Enonchong, has also co-founded and
chaired the Africa Technology Forum, a Maryland-based
nonprofit initiative to encourage and educate Africans, women
in particular, on the use of technology.
- She also co-founded and chairs ActivSpaces (African Center
for Technology Innovation and Ventures), Cameroon's Leading
Tech Hub.

African Centre for Statistics
The African Centre for Statistics of
UNECA aims to be the first port of call
for African states seeking original data
to inform policy decisions and to serve
as a regional service centre for data on
economic, social, demographic, and
environmental conditions in African
countries.

- The Centre published several articles on Digitalization, the
role of digitalization in the Decade of Action for Africa,
Digital Africa and others articulating the need for Africa to
harness digitalization, especially now with the Covid-19
pandemic hovering worldwide.
- The Centre has also released several publications on the
role of open data such as the Africa Data Revolution Report
2018 and on the impact of Covid-19.
- UNECA is hosting events which accelerate the awareness of
industry 4.0 technologies to promote adaptation to and
investment in emerging technologies, i.e. The Nanotech
Innovation and Investment Forum, for a transformed and
prosperous Africa, taking place in December 2020.
- UNECA also embarked on the digital initiative DITE for
Africa to support African countries in fully harnessing the
opportunities of digital identity (ID) to facilitate the provision
of legal identity for all Africans and to leverage digital trade
in the AfCFTA.

UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION

23

Vienna International Centre | P.O. Box 300 | 1400 Vienna | Austria
Tel.: (+43-1) 26026-0 | unido@unido.org
www.unido.org

